doc/developers/plotting.rst, before:

.. _plotting_api:

================================
Developing with the Plotting API
================================

Scikit-learn defines a simple API for creating visualizations for machine
learning. The key features of this API is to run calculations once and to have
the flexibility to adjust the visualizations after the fact. This section is
intended for developers who wish to develop or maintain plotting tools. For
usage, users should refer to the :ref`User Guide <visualizations>`.

Plotting API Overview
---------------------

This logic is encapsulated into a display object where the computed data is
stored and the plotting is done in a `plot` method. The display object's
`__init__` method contains only the data needed to create the visualization.
The `plot` method takes in parameters that only have to do with visualization,
such as a matplotlib axes. The `plot` method will store the matplotlib artists
as attributes allowing for style adjustments through the display object. A
`plot_*` helper function accepts parameters to do the computation and the
parameters used for plotting. After the helper function creates the display
object with the computed values, it calls the display's plot method. Note that
the `plot` method defines attributes related to matplotlib, such as the line
artist. This allows for customizations after calling the `plot` method.

For example, the `RocCurveDisplay` defines the following methods and
attributes::

   class RocCurveDisplay:
       def __init__(self, fpr, tpr, roc_auc, estimator_name):
           ...
           self.fpr = fpr
           self.tpr = tpr
           self.roc_auc = roc_auc
           self.estimator_name = estimator_name

       def plot(self, ax=None, name=None, **kwargs):
           ...
           self.line_ = ...
           self.ax_ = ax
           self.figure_ = ax.figure_

   def plot_roc_curve(estimator, X, y, pos_label=None, sample_weight=None,
                      drop_intermediate=True, response_method="auto",
                      name=None, ax=None, **kwargs):
       # do computation
       viz = RocCurveDisplay(fpr, tpr, roc_auc, 
                                estimator.__class__.__name__)
       return viz.plot(ax=ax, name=name, **kwargs)

Read more in :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_miscellaneous_plot_roc_curve_visualization_api.py`
and the :ref:`User Guide <visualizations>`.

Plotting with Multiple Axes
---------------------------

Some of the plotting tools like
:func:`~sklearn.inspection.plot_partial_dependence` and
:class:`~sklearn.inspection.PartialDependenceDisplay` support plottong on
multiple axes. Two different scenarios are supported:

1. If a list of axes is passed in, `plot` will check if the number of axes is
consistent with the number of axes it expects and then draws on those axes. 2.
If a single axes is passed in, that axes defines a space for multiple axes to
be placed. In this case, we suggest using matplotlib's
`~matplotlib.gridspec.GridSpecFromSubplotSpec` to split up the space::

   import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
   from matplotlib.gridspec import GridSpecFromSubplotSpec

   fig, ax = plt.subplots()
   gs = GridSpecFromSubplotSpec(2, 2, subplot_spec=ax.get_subplotspec())

   ax_top_left = fig.add_subplot(gs[0, 0])
   ax_top_right = fig.add_subplot(gs[0, 1])
   ax_bottom = fig.add_subplot(gs[1, :])

By default, the `ax` keyword in `plot` is `None`. In this case, the single
axes is created and the gridspec api is used to create the regions to plot in.

See for example, :func:`~sklearn.inspection.plot_partial_dependence` which
plots multiple lines and contours using this API. The axes defining the
bounding box is saved in a `bounding_ax_` attribute. The individual axes
created are stored in an `axes_` ndarray, corresponding to the axes position on
the grid. Positions that are not used are set to `None`. Furthermore, the
matplotlib Artists are stored in `lines_` and `contours_` where the key is the
position on the grid. When a list of axes is passed in, the `axes_`, `lines_`,
and `contours_` is a 1d ndarray corresponding to the list of axes passed in.

Commit message:

API add from_estimator and from_predictions to RocCurveDisplay (#20569)
Co-authored-by: Thomas J. Fan <thomasjpfan@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: Adrin Jalali <adrin.jalali@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: Olivier Grisel <olivier.grisel@ensta.org>

doc/developers/plotting.rst, after:

.. _plotting_api:

================================
Developing with the Plotting API
================================

Scikit-learn defines a simple API for creating visualizations for machine
learning. The key features of this API is to run calculations once and to have
the flexibility to adjust the visualizations after the fact. This section is
intended for developers who wish to develop or maintain plotting tools. For
usage, users should refer to the :ref`User Guide <visualizations>`.

Plotting API Overview
---------------------

This logic is encapsulated into a display object where the computed data is
stored and the plotting is done in a `plot` method. The display object's
`__init__` method contains only the data needed to create the visualization.
The `plot` method takes in parameters that only have to do with visualization,
such as a matplotlib axes. The `plot` method will store the matplotlib artists
as attributes allowing for style adjustments through the display object. The
`Display` class should define one or both class methods: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`. These methods allows to create the `Display` object from
the estimator and some data or from the true and predicted values. After these
class methods create the display object with the computed values, then call the
display's plot method. Note that the `plot` method defines attributes related
to matplotlib, such as the line artist. This allows for customizations after
calling the `plot` method.

For example, the `RocCurveDisplay` defines the following methods and
attributes::

   class RocCurveDisplay:
       def __init__(self, fpr, tpr, roc_auc, estimator_name):
           ...
           self.fpr = fpr
           self.tpr = tpr
           self.roc_auc = roc_auc
           self.estimator_name = estimator_name

       @classmethod
       def from_estimator(cls, estimator, X, y):
           # get the predictions
           y_pred = estimator.predict_proba(X)[:, 1]
           return cls.from_predictions(y, y_pred, estimator.__class__.__name__)

       @classmethod
       def from_predictions(cls, y, y_pred, estimator_name):
           # do ROC computation from y and y_pred
           fpr, tpr, roc_auc = ...
           viz = RocCurveDisplay(fpr, tpr, roc_auc, estimator_name)
           return viz.plot()

       def plot(self, ax=None, name=None, **kwargs):
           ...
           self.line_ = ...
           self.ax_ = ax
           self.figure_ = ax.figure_

Read more in :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_miscellaneous_plot_roc_curve_visualization_api.py`
and the :ref:`User Guide <visualizations>`.

Plotting with Multiple Axes
---------------------------

Some of the plotting tools like
:func:`~sklearn.inspection.plot_partial_dependence` and
:class:`~sklearn.inspection.PartialDependenceDisplay` support plottong on
multiple axes. Two different scenarios are supported:

1. If a list of axes is passed in, `plot` will check if the number of axes is
consistent with the number of axes it expects and then draws on those axes. 2.
If a single axes is passed in, that axes defines a space for multiple axes to
be placed. In this case, we suggest using matplotlib's
`~matplotlib.gridspec.GridSpecFromSubplotSpec` to split up the space::

   import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
   from matplotlib.gridspec import GridSpecFromSubplotSpec

   fig, ax = plt.subplots()
   gs = GridSpecFromSubplotSpec(2, 2, subplot_spec=ax.get_subplotspec())

   ax_top_left = fig.add_subplot(gs[0, 0])
   ax_top_right = fig.add_subplot(gs[0, 1])
   ax_bottom = fig.add_subplot(gs[1, :])

By default, the `ax` keyword in `plot` is `None`. In this case, the single
axes is created and the gridspec api is used to create the regions to plot in.

See for example, :func:`~sklearn.inspection.plot_partial_dependence` which
plots multiple lines and contours using this API. The axes defining the
bounding box is saved in a `bounding_ax_` attribute. The individual axes
created are stored in an `axes_` ndarray, corresponding to the axes position on
the grid. Positions that are not used are set to `None`. Furthermore, the
matplotlib Artists are stored in `lines_` and `contours_` where the key is the
position on the grid. When a list of axes is passed in, the `axes_`, `lines_`,
and `contours_` is a 1d ndarray corresponding to the list of axes passed in.
