doc/whats_new/v1.1.rst, before:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_1_1:

Version 1.1.0
=============

**In Development**


.. include:: changelog_legend.inc

Minimal dependencies
--------------------

Version 1.1.0 of scikit-learn requires python 3.7+, numpy 1.14.6+ and
scipy 1.1.0+. Optional minimal dependency is matplotlib 2.2.3+.

Put the changes in their relevant module.

Changed models
--------------


Changelog
---------

..
    Entries should be grouped by module (in alphabetic order) and prefixed with
    one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|, |Enhancement|,
    |Fix| or |API| (see whats_new.rst for descriptions).
    Entries should be ordered by those labels (e.g. |Fix| after |Efficiency|).
    Changes not specific to a module should be listed under *Multiple Modules*
    or *Miscellaneous*.
    Entries should end with:
    :pr:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.
    where 123456 is the *pull request* number, not the issue number.

:mod:`sklearn.calibration`
..........................

- |Enhancement| :func:`calibration.calibration_curve` accepts a parameter
  `pos_label` to specify the positive class label.
  :pr:`21032` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.cross_decomposition`
..................................

- |Enhancement| :func:`cross_decomposition._PLS.inverse_transform` now allows
  reconstruction of a `X` target when a `Y` parameter is given. :pr:`19680` by
  :user:`Robin Thibaut <robinthibaut>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Fix| Fixed a bug that could produce a segfault in rare cases for
  :class:`ensemble.HistGradientBoostingClassifier` and
  :class:`ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor`.
  :pr:`21130` :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_extraction`
.................................

- |Fix| Fixed a bug in :class:`feature_extraction.CountVectorizer` and
  :class:`feature_extraction.TfidfVectorizer` by raising an
  error when 'min_idf' or 'max_idf' are floating-point numbers greater than 1.
  :pr:`20752` by :user:`Alek Lefebvre <AlekLefebvre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.impute`
.....................

- |API| Adds :meth:`get_feature_names_out` to :class:`impute.SimpleImputer`,
  :class:`impute.KNNImputer`, :class:`impute.IterativeImputer`, and
  :class:`impute.MissingIndicator`. :pr:`21078` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Fix| :class:`linear_model.LogisticRegression` now raises a better error
  message when the solver does not support sparse matrices with int64 indices.
  :pr:`21093` by `Tom Dupre la Tour`_.

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |API| :class:`metrics.DistanceMetric` has been moved from
  :mod:`sklearn.neighbors` to :mod:`sklearn.metric`.
  Using `neighbors.DistanceMetric` for imports is still valid for
  backward compatibility, but this alias will be removed in 1.3.
  :pr:`21177` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.model_selection`
..............................

- |Enhancement| raise an error during cross-validation when the fits for all the
  splits failed. Similarly raise an error during grid-search when the fits for
  all the models and all the splits failed. :pr:`21026` by :user:`Loïc Estève <lesteve>`.

:mod:`sklearn.pipeline`
.......................

- |Enhancement| Added support for "passthrough" in :class:`FeatureUnion`.
  Setting a transformer to "passthrough" will pass the features unchanged.
  :pr:`20860` by :user:`Shubhraneel Pal <shubhraneel>`.

:mod:`sklearn.utils`
....................

- |Enhancement| :func:`utils.validation._check_sample_weight` can perform a
  non-negativity check on the sample weights. It can be turned on
  using the only_non_negative bool parameter.
  Estimators that check for non-negative weights are updated:
  :func:`linear_model.LinearRegression` (here the previous
  error message was misleading),
  :func:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier`,
  :func:`ensemble.AdaBoostRegressor`,
  :func:`neighbors.KernelDensity`.
  :pr:`20880` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`
  and :user:`András Simon <simonandras>`.

Code and Documentation Contributors
-----------------------------------

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the maintenance and improvement of
the project since version 1.0, including:

TODO: update at the time of the release.

Commit message:

ENH Improves message for HTML repr when notebook is not trusted (#21316)

doc/whats_new/v1.1.rst, after:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_1_1:

Version 1.1.0
=============

**In Development**


.. include:: changelog_legend.inc

Minimal dependencies
--------------------

Version 1.1.0 of scikit-learn requires python 3.7+, numpy 1.14.6+ and
scipy 1.1.0+. Optional minimal dependency is matplotlib 2.2.3+.

Put the changes in their relevant module.

Changed models
--------------


Changelog
---------

..
    Entries should be grouped by module (in alphabetic order) and prefixed with
    one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|, |Enhancement|,
    |Fix| or |API| (see whats_new.rst for descriptions).
    Entries should be ordered by those labels (e.g. |Fix| after |Efficiency|).
    Changes not specific to a module should be listed under *Multiple Modules*
    or *Miscellaneous*.
    Entries should end with:
    :pr:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.
    where 123456 is the *pull request* number, not the issue number.

:mod:`sklearn.calibration`
..........................

- |Enhancement| :func:`calibration.calibration_curve` accepts a parameter
  `pos_label` to specify the positive class label.
  :pr:`21032` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.cross_decomposition`
..................................

- |Enhancement| :func:`cross_decomposition._PLS.inverse_transform` now allows
  reconstruction of a `X` target when a `Y` parameter is given. :pr:`19680` by
  :user:`Robin Thibaut <robinthibaut>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Fix| Fixed a bug that could produce a segfault in rare cases for
  :class:`ensemble.HistGradientBoostingClassifier` and
  :class:`ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor`.
  :pr:`21130` :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_extraction`
.................................

- |Fix| Fixed a bug in :class:`feature_extraction.CountVectorizer` and
  :class:`feature_extraction.TfidfVectorizer` by raising an
  error when 'min_idf' or 'max_idf' are floating-point numbers greater than 1.
  :pr:`20752` by :user:`Alek Lefebvre <AlekLefebvre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.impute`
.....................

- |API| Adds :meth:`get_feature_names_out` to :class:`impute.SimpleImputer`,
  :class:`impute.KNNImputer`, :class:`impute.IterativeImputer`, and
  :class:`impute.MissingIndicator`. :pr:`21078` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Fix| :class:`linear_model.LogisticRegression` now raises a better error
  message when the solver does not support sparse matrices with int64 indices.
  :pr:`21093` by `Tom Dupre la Tour`_.

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |API| :class:`metrics.DistanceMetric` has been moved from
  :mod:`sklearn.neighbors` to :mod:`sklearn.metric`.
  Using `neighbors.DistanceMetric` for imports is still valid for
  backward compatibility, but this alias will be removed in 1.3.
  :pr:`21177` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.model_selection`
..............................

- |Enhancement| raise an error during cross-validation when the fits for all the
  splits failed. Similarly raise an error during grid-search when the fits for
  all the models and all the splits failed. :pr:`21026` by :user:`Loïc Estève <lesteve>`.

:mod:`sklearn.pipeline`
.......................

- |Enhancement| Added support for "passthrough" in :class:`FeatureUnion`.
  Setting a transformer to "passthrough" will pass the features unchanged.
  :pr:`20860` by :user:`Shubhraneel Pal <shubhraneel>`.

:mod:`sklearn.utils`
....................

- |Enhancement| :func:`utils.validation._check_sample_weight` can perform a
  non-negativity check on the sample weights. It can be turned on
  using the only_non_negative bool parameter.
  Estimators that check for non-negative weights are updated:
  :func:`linear_model.LinearRegression` (here the previous
  error message was misleading),
  :func:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier`,
  :func:`ensemble.AdaBoostRegressor`,
  :func:`neighbors.KernelDensity`.
  :pr:`20880` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`
  and :user:`András Simon <simonandras>`.

- |Enhancement| :func:`utils.estimator_html_repr` shows a more helpful error
  message when running in a jupyter notebook that is not trusted. :pr:`21316`
  by `Thomas Fan`_.

Code and Documentation Contributors
-----------------------------------

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the maintenance and improvement of
the project since version 1.0, including:

TODO: update at the time of the release.
