doc/whats_new/v1.2.rst, before:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_1_2:

Version 1.2.0
=============

**In Development**

.. include:: changelog_legend.inc

Changed models
--------------

The following estimators and functions, when fit with the same data and
parameters, may produce different models from the previous version. This often
occurs due to changes in the modelling logic (bug fixes or enhancements), or in
random sampling procedures.

- |Enhancement| The default `eigen_tol` for :class:`cluster.SpectralClustering`,
  :class:`manifold.SpectralEmbedding`, :func:`cluster.spectral_clustering`,
  and :func:`manifold.spectral_embedding` is now `None` when using the `'amg'`
  or `'lobpcg'` solvers. This change improves numerical stability of the
  solver, but may result in a different model.

- |Enhancement| :class:`linear_model.GammaRegressor`,
  :class:`linear_model.PoissonRegressor` and :class:`linear_model.TweedieRegressor`
  can reach higher precision with the lbfgs solver, in particular when `tol` is set
  to a tiny value. Moreover, `verbose` is now properly propagated to L-BFGS-B.
  :pr:`23619` by :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

- |Fix| Make sign of `components_` deterministic in :class:`decomposition.SparsePCA`.
  :pr:`23935` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Fix| The `components_` signs in :class:`decomposition.FastICA` might differ.
  It is now consistent and deterministic with all SVD solvers.
  :pr:`22527` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>` and `Thomas Fan`_.

Changes impacting all modules
-----------------------------

- |Enhancement| Finiteness checks (detection of NaN and infinite values) in all
  estimators are now significantly more efficient for float32 data by leveraging
  NumPy's SIMD optimized primitives.
  :pr:`23446` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`

- |Enhancement| Finiteness checks (detection of NaN and infinite values) in all
  estimators are now faster by utilizing a more efficient stop-on-first
  second-pass algorithm.
  :pr:`23197` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`

Changelog
---------

..
    Entries should be grouped by module (in alphabetic order) and prefixed with
    one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|, |Enhancement|,
    |Fix| or |API| (see whats_new.rst for descriptions).
    Entries should be ordered by those labels (e.g. |Fix| after |Efficiency|).
    Changes not specific to a module should be listed under *Multiple Modules*
    or *Miscellaneous*.
    Entries should end with:
    :pr:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.
    where 123456 is the *pull request* number, not the issue number.

:mod:`sklearn.calibration`
..........................

- |API| Rename `base_estimator` to `estimator` in
  :class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` to improve readability and consistency. The
  parameter `base_estimator` is deprecated and will be removed in 1.4.
  :pr:`22054` by :user:`Kevin Roice <kevroi>`.

- |Efficiency| Low-level routines for reductions on pairwise distances
  for dense float32 datasets have been refactored. The following functions
  and estimators now benefit from improved performances in terms of hardware
  scalability and speed-ups:

  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin`
  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin_min`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.AffinityPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.Birch`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.MeanShift`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.OPTICS`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.SpectralClustering`
  - :func:`sklearn.feature_selection.mutual_info_regression`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.Isomap`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.LocallyLinearEmbedding`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.TSNE`
  - :func:`sklearn.manifold.trustworthiness`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelSpreading`

  For instance :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors` and
  :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors.radius_neighbors`
  can respectively be up to ×20 and ×5 faster than previously on a laptop.

  Moreover, implementations of those two algorithms are now suitable
  for machine with many cores, making them usable for datasets consisting
  of millions of samples.

  :pr:`23865` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.cluster`
......................

- |Enhancement| The `predict` and `fit_predict` methods of :class:`cluster.OPTICS` now
  accept sparse data type for input data. :pr:`14736` by :user:`Hunt Zhan <huntzhan>`,
  :pr:`20802` by :user:`Brandon Pokorny <Clickedbigfoot>`,
  and :pr:`22965` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`cluster.Birch` now preserves dtype for `numpy.float32`
  inputs. :pr:`22968` by `Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`cluster.KMeans` and :class:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans`
  now accept a new `'auto'` option for `n_init` which changes the number of
  random initializations to one when using `init='k-means++'` for efficiency.
  This begins deprecation for the default values of `n_init` in the two classes
  and both will have their defaults changed to `n_init='auto'` in 1.4.
  :pr:`23038` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`cluster.SpectralClustering` and
  :func:`cluster.spectral_clustering` now propogates the `eigen_tol` parameter
  to all choices of `eigen_solver`. Includes a new option `eigen_tol="auto"`
  and begins deprecation to change the default from `eigen_tol=0` to
  `eigen_tol="auto"` in version 1.3.
  :pr:`23210` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |API| The `affinity` attribute is now deprecated for
  :class:`cluster.AgglomerativeClustering` and will be renamed to `metric` in v1.4.
  :pr:`23470` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Fix| :class:`cluster.KMeans` now supports readonly attributes when predicting.
  :pr:`24258` by `Thomas Fan`_

- |Efficiency| :class:`cluster.KMeans` with `algorithm="lloyd"` is now faster
  and uses less memory. :pr:`24264` by
  :user:`Vincent Maladiere <Vincent-Maladiere>`.

:mod:`sklearn.datasets`
.......................

- |Enhancement| Introduce the new parameter `parser` in
  :func:`datasets.fetch_openml`. `parser="pandas"` allows to use the very CPU
  and memory efficient `pandas.read_csv` parser to load dense ARFF
  formatted dataset files. It is possible to pass `parser="liac-arff"`
  to use the old LIAC parser.
  When `parser="auto"`, dense datasets are loaded with "pandas" and sparse
  datasets are loaded with "liac-arff".
  Currently, `parser="liac-arff"` by default and will change to `parser="auto"`
  in version 1.4
  :pr:`21938` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| :func:`datasets.dump_svmlight_file` is now accelerated with a
  Cython implementation, providing 2-4x speedups.
  :pr:`23127` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`

:mod:`sklearn.decomposition`
............................

- |Efficiency| :func:`decomposition.FastICA.fit` has been optimised w.r.t
  its memory footprint and runtime.
  :pr:`22268` by :user:`MohamedBsh <Bsh>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`decomposition.SparsePCA` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchSparsePCA` now implements an `inverse_transform`
  function.
  :pr:`23905` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |API| The `n_iter` parameter of :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchSparsePCA` is
  deprecated and replaced by the parameters `max_iter`, `tol`, and
  `max_no_improvement` to be consistent with
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchDictionaryLearning`. `n_iter` will be removed
  in version 1.3. :pr:`23726` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Fix| Make sign of `components_` deterministic in :class:`decomposition.SparsePCA`.
  :pr:`23935` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`decomposition.FastICA` now allows the user to select
  how whitening is performed through the new `whiten_solver` parameter, which
  supports `svd` and `eigh`. `whiten_solver` defaults to `svd` although `eigh`
  may be faster and more memory efficient in cases where
  `num_features > num_samples`.
  :pr:`11860` by :user:`Pierre Ablin <pierreablin>`,
  :pr:`22527` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>` and `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.discriminant_analysis`
....................................

- |Fix| Validate parameters only in `fit` and not in `__init__`
  for :class:`discriminant_analysis.QuadraticDiscriminantAnalysis`.
  :pr:`24218` by :user:`Stefanie Molin <stefmolin>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Efficiency| Improve runtime performance of :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest`
  by avoiding data copies. :pr:`23252` by :user:`Zhehao Liu <MaxwellLZH>`.

- |Fix| Fixed the issue where :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier` outputs
  NaN in feature importance when fitted with very small sample weight.
  :pr:`20415` by :user:`Zhehao Liu <MaxwellLZH>`.

- |API| Rename the constructor parameter `base_estimator` to `estimator` in
  the following classes:
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostRegressor`.
  `base_estimator` is deprecated in 1.2 and will be removed in 1.4.
  :pr:`23819` by :user:`Adrian Trujillo <trujillo9616>` and :user:`Edoardo Abati <EdAbati>`.

- |API| Rename the fitted attribute `base_estimator_` to `estimator_` in
  the following classes:
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.RandomForestRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.RandomTreesEmbedding`,
  :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest`.
  `base_estimator_` is deprecated in 1.2 and will be removed in 1.4.
  :pr:`23819` by :user:`Adrian Trujillo <trujillo9616>` and :user:`Edoardo Abati <EdAbati>`.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_selection`
................................

:mod:`sklearn.gaussian_process`
...............................

- |Fix| Fix :class:`gaussian_process.kernels.Matern` gradient computation with
  `nu=0.5` for PyPy (and possibly other non CPython interpreters). :pr:`24245`
  by :user:`Loïc Estève <lesteve>`.

:mod:`sklearn.kernel_approximation`
...................................

- |Enhancement| :class:`kernel_approximation.RBFSampler` now preserves
  dtype for `numpy.float32` inputs. :pr:`24317` by `Tim Head <betatim>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`kernel_approximation.SkewedChi2Sampler` now preserves
  dtype for `numpy.float32` inputs. :pr:`24350` by :user:`Rahil Parikh <rprkh>`.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Enhancement| :class:`linear_model.GammaRegressor`,
  :class:`linear_model.PoissonRegressor` and :class:`linear_model.TweedieRegressor`
  can reach higher precision with the lbfgs solver, in particular when `tol` is set
  to a tiny value. Moreover, `verbose` is now properly propagated to L-BFGS-B.
  :pr:`23619` by :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

- |API| The default value for the `solver` parameter in
  :class:`linear_model.QuantileRegressor` will change from `"interior-point"`
  to `"highs"` in version 1.4.
  :pr:`23637` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |API| String option `"none"` is deprecated for `penalty` argument
  in :class:`linear_model.LogisticRegression`, and will be removed in version 1.4.
  Use `None` instead. :pr:`23877` by :user:`Zhehao Liu <MaxwellLZH>`.

:mod:`sklearn.manifold`
.......................

- |Feature| Adds option to use the normalized stress in `manifold.MDS`. This is
  enabled by setting the new `normalize` parameter to `True`.
  :pr:`10168` by :user:`Łukasz Borchmann <Borchmann>`,
  :pr:`12285` by :user:`Matthias Miltenberger <mattmilten>`,
  :pr:`13042` by :user:`Matthieu Parizy <matthieu-pa>`,
  :pr:`18094` by :user:`Roth E Conrad <rotheconrad>` and
  :pr:`22562` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| Adds `eigen_tol` parameter to
  :class:`manifold.SpectralEmbedding`. Both :func:`manifold.spectral_embedding`
  and :class:`manifold.SpectralEmbedding` now propogate `eigen_tol` to all
  choices of `eigen_solver`. Includes a new option `eigen_tol="auto"`
  and begins deprecation to change the default from `eigen_tol=0` to
  `eigen_tol="auto"` in version 1.3.
  :pr:`23210` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |Feature| :func:`metrics.ConfusionMatrixDisplay.from_estimator`,
  :func:`metrics.ConfusionMatrixDisplay.from_predictions`, and
  :meth:`metrics.ConfusionMatrixDisplay.plot` accepts a `text_kw` parameter which is passed to
  matplotlib's `text` function. :pr:`24051` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Feature| :func:`metrics.class_likelihood_ratios` is added to compute the positive and
  negative likelihood ratios derived from the confusion matrix
  of a binary classification problem. :pr:`22518` by
  :user:`Arturo Amor <ArturoAmorQ>`.

- |Fix| Allows `csr_matrix` as input for parameter: `y_true` of
   the :func:`metrics.label_ranking_average_precision_score` metric.
   :pr:`23442` by :user:`Sean Atukorala <ShehanAT>`
  
- |Fix| :func:`metrics.ndcg_score` will now trigger a warning when the `y_true`
  value contains a negative value. Users may still use negative values, but the
  result may not be between 0 and 1. Starting in v1.4, passing in negative
  values for `y_true` will raise an error.
  :pr:`22710` by :user:`Conroy Trinh <trinhcon>` and
  :pr:`23461` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.model_selection`
..............................

- |Fix| For all `SearchCV` classes and scipy >= 1.10, rank corresponding to a
  nan score is correctly set to the maximum possible rank, rather than
  `np.iinfo(np.int32).min`. :pr:`24141` by :user:`Loïc Estève <lesteve>`.

:mod:`sklearn.multioutput`
..........................

- |Feature| Added boolean `verbose` flag to classes:
  :class:`multioutput.ClassifierChain` and :class:`multioutput.RegressorChain`.
  :pr:`23977` by :user:`Eric Fiegel <efiegel>`,
  :user:`Chiara Marmo <cmarmo>`,
  :user:`Lucy Liu <lucyleeow>`, and
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.naive_bayes`
..........................

- |Feature| Add methods `predict_joint_log_proba` to all naive Bayes classifiers.
  :pr:`23683` by :user:`Andrey Melnik <avm19>`.

- |Enhancement| A new parameter `force_alpha` was added to
  :class:`naive_bayes.BernoulliNB`, :class:`naive_bayes.ComplementNB`,
  :class:`naive_bayes.CategoricalNB`, and :class:`naive_bayes.MultinomialNB`,
  allowing user to set parameter alpha to a very small number, greater or equal
  0, which was earlier automatically changed to `1e-10` instead.
  :pr:`16747` by :user:`arka204`,
  :pr:`18805` by :user:`hongshaoyang`,
  :pr:`22269` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.neighbors`
........................

- |Enhancement| :class:`neighbors.KernelDensity` bandwidth parameter now accepts
  definition using Scott's and Silverman's estimation methods.
  :pr:`10468` by :user:`Ruben <icfly2>` and :pr:`22993` by
  :user:`Jovan Stojanovic <jovan-stojanovic>`.

- |Feature| Adds new function :func:`neighbors.sort_graph_by_row_values` to
  sort a CSR sparse graph such that each row is stored with increasing values.
  This is useful to improve efficiency when using precomputed sparse distance
  matrices in a variety of estimators and avoid an `EfficiencyWarning`.
  :pr:`23139` by `Tom Dupre la Tour`_.

- |Fix| :class:`NearestCentroid` now raises an informative error message at fit-time
  instead of failing with a low-level error message at predict-time.
  :pr:`23874` by :user:`Juan Gomez <2357juan>`.

- |Fix| Set `n_jobs=None` by default (instead of `1`) for
  :class:`neighbors.KNeighborsTransformer` and
  :class:`neighbors.RadiusNeighborsTransformer`.
  :pr:`24075` by :user:`Valentin Laurent <Valentin-Laurent>`.

:mod:`sklearn.preprocessing`
............................

- |Enhancement| :class:`preprocessing.FunctionTransformer` will always try to set
  `n_features_in_` and `feature_names_in_` regardless of the `validate` parameter.
  :pr:`23993` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.svm`
..................

- |API| The `class_weight_` attribute is now deprecated for
  :class:`svm.NuSVR`, :class:`svm.SVR`, :class:`svm.OneClassSVM`.
  :pr:`22898` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.tree`
...................

- |Enhancement| :func:`tree.plot_tree`, :func:`tree.export_graphviz` now uses
  a lower case `x[i]` to represent feature `i`. :pr:`23480` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.utils`
....................

- |Enhancement| :func:`utils.extmath.randomized_svd` now accepts an argument,
  `lapack_svd_driver`, to specify the lapack driver used in the internal
  deterministic SVD used by the randomized SVD algorithm.
  :pr:`20617` by :user:`Srinath Kailasa <skailasa>`

Code and Documentation Contributors
-----------------------------------

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the maintenance and improvement of
the project since version 1.1, including:

TODO: update at the time of the release.

Commit message:

FIX Ensure that GaussianProcessRegressor predict method does not modify input (#24405)

doc/whats_new/v1.2.rst, after:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_1_2:

Version 1.2.0
=============

**In Development**

.. include:: changelog_legend.inc

Changed models
--------------

The following estimators and functions, when fit with the same data and
parameters, may produce different models from the previous version. This often
occurs due to changes in the modelling logic (bug fixes or enhancements), or in
random sampling procedures.

- |Enhancement| The default `eigen_tol` for :class:`cluster.SpectralClustering`,
  :class:`manifold.SpectralEmbedding`, :func:`cluster.spectral_clustering`,
  and :func:`manifold.spectral_embedding` is now `None` when using the `'amg'`
  or `'lobpcg'` solvers. This change improves numerical stability of the
  solver, but may result in a different model.

- |Enhancement| :class:`linear_model.GammaRegressor`,
  :class:`linear_model.PoissonRegressor` and :class:`linear_model.TweedieRegressor`
  can reach higher precision with the lbfgs solver, in particular when `tol` is set
  to a tiny value. Moreover, `verbose` is now properly propagated to L-BFGS-B.
  :pr:`23619` by :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

- |Fix| Make sign of `components_` deterministic in :class:`decomposition.SparsePCA`.
  :pr:`23935` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Fix| The `components_` signs in :class:`decomposition.FastICA` might differ.
  It is now consistent and deterministic with all SVD solvers.
  :pr:`22527` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>` and `Thomas Fan`_.

Changes impacting all modules
-----------------------------

- |Enhancement| Finiteness checks (detection of NaN and infinite values) in all
  estimators are now significantly more efficient for float32 data by leveraging
  NumPy's SIMD optimized primitives.
  :pr:`23446` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`

- |Enhancement| Finiteness checks (detection of NaN and infinite values) in all
  estimators are now faster by utilizing a more efficient stop-on-first
  second-pass algorithm.
  :pr:`23197` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`

Changelog
---------

..
    Entries should be grouped by module (in alphabetic order) and prefixed with
    one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|, |Enhancement|,
    |Fix| or |API| (see whats_new.rst for descriptions).
    Entries should be ordered by those labels (e.g. |Fix| after |Efficiency|).
    Changes not specific to a module should be listed under *Multiple Modules*
    or *Miscellaneous*.
    Entries should end with:
    :pr:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.
    where 123456 is the *pull request* number, not the issue number.

:mod:`sklearn.calibration`
..........................

- |API| Rename `base_estimator` to `estimator` in
  :class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` to improve readability and consistency. The
  parameter `base_estimator` is deprecated and will be removed in 1.4.
  :pr:`22054` by :user:`Kevin Roice <kevroi>`.

- |Efficiency| Low-level routines for reductions on pairwise distances
  for dense float32 datasets have been refactored. The following functions
  and estimators now benefit from improved performances in terms of hardware
  scalability and speed-ups:

  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin`
  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin_min`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.AffinityPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.Birch`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.MeanShift`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.OPTICS`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.SpectralClustering`
  - :func:`sklearn.feature_selection.mutual_info_regression`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.Isomap`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.LocallyLinearEmbedding`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.TSNE`
  - :func:`sklearn.manifold.trustworthiness`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelSpreading`

  For instance :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors` and
  :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors.radius_neighbors`
  can respectively be up to ×20 and ×5 faster than previously on a laptop.

  Moreover, implementations of those two algorithms are now suitable
  for machine with many cores, making them usable for datasets consisting
  of millions of samples.

  :pr:`23865` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.cluster`
......................

- |Enhancement| The `predict` and `fit_predict` methods of :class:`cluster.OPTICS` now
  accept sparse data type for input data. :pr:`14736` by :user:`Hunt Zhan <huntzhan>`,
  :pr:`20802` by :user:`Brandon Pokorny <Clickedbigfoot>`,
  and :pr:`22965` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`cluster.Birch` now preserves dtype for `numpy.float32`
  inputs. :pr:`22968` by `Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`cluster.KMeans` and :class:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans`
  now accept a new `'auto'` option for `n_init` which changes the number of
  random initializations to one when using `init='k-means++'` for efficiency.
  This begins deprecation for the default values of `n_init` in the two classes
  and both will have their defaults changed to `n_init='auto'` in 1.4.
  :pr:`23038` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`cluster.SpectralClustering` and
  :func:`cluster.spectral_clustering` now propogates the `eigen_tol` parameter
  to all choices of `eigen_solver`. Includes a new option `eigen_tol="auto"`
  and begins deprecation to change the default from `eigen_tol=0` to
  `eigen_tol="auto"` in version 1.3.
  :pr:`23210` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |API| The `affinity` attribute is now deprecated for
  :class:`cluster.AgglomerativeClustering` and will be renamed to `metric` in v1.4.
  :pr:`23470` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Fix| :class:`cluster.KMeans` now supports readonly attributes when predicting.
  :pr:`24258` by `Thomas Fan`_

- |Efficiency| :class:`cluster.KMeans` with `algorithm="lloyd"` is now faster
  and uses less memory. :pr:`24264` by
  :user:`Vincent Maladiere <Vincent-Maladiere>`.

:mod:`sklearn.datasets`
.......................

- |Enhancement| Introduce the new parameter `parser` in
  :func:`datasets.fetch_openml`. `parser="pandas"` allows to use the very CPU
  and memory efficient `pandas.read_csv` parser to load dense ARFF
  formatted dataset files. It is possible to pass `parser="liac-arff"`
  to use the old LIAC parser.
  When `parser="auto"`, dense datasets are loaded with "pandas" and sparse
  datasets are loaded with "liac-arff".
  Currently, `parser="liac-arff"` by default and will change to `parser="auto"`
  in version 1.4
  :pr:`21938` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| :func:`datasets.dump_svmlight_file` is now accelerated with a
  Cython implementation, providing 2-4x speedups.
  :pr:`23127` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`

:mod:`sklearn.decomposition`
............................

- |Efficiency| :func:`decomposition.FastICA.fit` has been optimised w.r.t
  its memory footprint and runtime.
  :pr:`22268` by :user:`MohamedBsh <Bsh>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`decomposition.SparsePCA` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchSparsePCA` now implements an `inverse_transform`
  function.
  :pr:`23905` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |API| The `n_iter` parameter of :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchSparsePCA` is
  deprecated and replaced by the parameters `max_iter`, `tol`, and
  `max_no_improvement` to be consistent with
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchDictionaryLearning`. `n_iter` will be removed
  in version 1.3. :pr:`23726` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Fix| Make sign of `components_` deterministic in :class:`decomposition.SparsePCA`.
  :pr:`23935` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`decomposition.FastICA` now allows the user to select
  how whitening is performed through the new `whiten_solver` parameter, which
  supports `svd` and `eigh`. `whiten_solver` defaults to `svd` although `eigh`
  may be faster and more memory efficient in cases where
  `num_features > num_samples`.
  :pr:`11860` by :user:`Pierre Ablin <pierreablin>`,
  :pr:`22527` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>` and `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.discriminant_analysis`
....................................

- |Fix| Validate parameters only in `fit` and not in `__init__`
  for :class:`discriminant_analysis.QuadraticDiscriminantAnalysis`.
  :pr:`24218` by :user:`Stefanie Molin <stefmolin>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Efficiency| Improve runtime performance of :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest`
  by avoiding data copies. :pr:`23252` by :user:`Zhehao Liu <MaxwellLZH>`.

- |Fix| Fixed the issue where :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier` outputs
  NaN in feature importance when fitted with very small sample weight.
  :pr:`20415` by :user:`Zhehao Liu <MaxwellLZH>`.

- |API| Rename the constructor parameter `base_estimator` to `estimator` in
  the following classes:
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostRegressor`.
  `base_estimator` is deprecated in 1.2 and will be removed in 1.4.
  :pr:`23819` by :user:`Adrian Trujillo <trujillo9616>` and :user:`Edoardo Abati <EdAbati>`.

- |API| Rename the fitted attribute `base_estimator_` to `estimator_` in
  the following classes:
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.AdaBoostRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.RandomForestRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesClassifier`,
  :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.RandomTreesEmbedding`,
  :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest`.
  `base_estimator_` is deprecated in 1.2 and will be removed in 1.4.
  :pr:`23819` by :user:`Adrian Trujillo <trujillo9616>` and :user:`Edoardo Abati <EdAbati>`.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_selection`
................................

:mod:`sklearn.gaussian_process`
...............................

- |Fix| Fix :class:`gaussian_process.kernels.Matern` gradient computation with
  `nu=0.5` for PyPy (and possibly other non CPython interpreters). :pr:`24245`
  by :user:`Loïc Estève <lesteve>`.

- |Fix| The `fit` method of :class:`gaussian_process.GaussianProcessRegressor`
  will not modify the input X in case a custom kernel is used, with a `diag`
  method that returns part of the input X. :pr:`24405`
  by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

:mod:`sklearn.kernel_approximation`
...................................

- |Enhancement| :class:`kernel_approximation.RBFSampler` now preserves
  dtype for `numpy.float32` inputs. :pr:`24317` by `Tim Head <betatim>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`kernel_approximation.SkewedChi2Sampler` now preserves
  dtype for `numpy.float32` inputs. :pr:`24350` by :user:`Rahil Parikh <rprkh>`.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Enhancement| :class:`linear_model.GammaRegressor`,
  :class:`linear_model.PoissonRegressor` and :class:`linear_model.TweedieRegressor`
  can reach higher precision with the lbfgs solver, in particular when `tol` is set
  to a tiny value. Moreover, `verbose` is now properly propagated to L-BFGS-B.
  :pr:`23619` by :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

- |API| The default value for the `solver` parameter in
  :class:`linear_model.QuantileRegressor` will change from `"interior-point"`
  to `"highs"` in version 1.4.
  :pr:`23637` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |API| String option `"none"` is deprecated for `penalty` argument
  in :class:`linear_model.LogisticRegression`, and will be removed in version 1.4.
  Use `None` instead. :pr:`23877` by :user:`Zhehao Liu <MaxwellLZH>`.

:mod:`sklearn.manifold`
.......................

- |Feature| Adds option to use the normalized stress in `manifold.MDS`. This is
  enabled by setting the new `normalize` parameter to `True`.
  :pr:`10168` by :user:`Łukasz Borchmann <Borchmann>`,
  :pr:`12285` by :user:`Matthias Miltenberger <mattmilten>`,
  :pr:`13042` by :user:`Matthieu Parizy <matthieu-pa>`,
  :pr:`18094` by :user:`Roth E Conrad <rotheconrad>` and
  :pr:`22562` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

- |Enhancement| Adds `eigen_tol` parameter to
  :class:`manifold.SpectralEmbedding`. Both :func:`manifold.spectral_embedding`
  and :class:`manifold.SpectralEmbedding` now propogate `eigen_tol` to all
  choices of `eigen_solver`. Includes a new option `eigen_tol="auto"`
  and begins deprecation to change the default from `eigen_tol=0` to
  `eigen_tol="auto"` in version 1.3.
  :pr:`23210` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |Feature| :func:`metrics.ConfusionMatrixDisplay.from_estimator`,
  :func:`metrics.ConfusionMatrixDisplay.from_predictions`, and
  :meth:`metrics.ConfusionMatrixDisplay.plot` accepts a `text_kw` parameter which is passed to
  matplotlib's `text` function. :pr:`24051` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Feature| :func:`metrics.class_likelihood_ratios` is added to compute the positive and
  negative likelihood ratios derived from the confusion matrix
  of a binary classification problem. :pr:`22518` by
  :user:`Arturo Amor <ArturoAmorQ>`.

- |Fix| Allows `csr_matrix` as input for parameter: `y_true` of
   the :func:`metrics.label_ranking_average_precision_score` metric.
   :pr:`23442` by :user:`Sean Atukorala <ShehanAT>`

- |Fix| :func:`metrics.ndcg_score` will now trigger a warning when the `y_true`
  value contains a negative value. Users may still use negative values, but the
  result may not be between 0 and 1. Starting in v1.4, passing in negative
  values for `y_true` will raise an error.
  :pr:`22710` by :user:`Conroy Trinh <trinhcon>` and
  :pr:`23461` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.model_selection`
..............................

- |Fix| For all `SearchCV` classes and scipy >= 1.10, rank corresponding to a
  nan score is correctly set to the maximum possible rank, rather than
  `np.iinfo(np.int32).min`. :pr:`24141` by :user:`Loïc Estève <lesteve>`.

:mod:`sklearn.multioutput`
..........................

- |Feature| Added boolean `verbose` flag to classes:
  :class:`multioutput.ClassifierChain` and :class:`multioutput.RegressorChain`.
  :pr:`23977` by :user:`Eric Fiegel <efiegel>`,
  :user:`Chiara Marmo <cmarmo>`,
  :user:`Lucy Liu <lucyleeow>`, and
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.naive_bayes`
..........................

- |Feature| Add methods `predict_joint_log_proba` to all naive Bayes classifiers.
  :pr:`23683` by :user:`Andrey Melnik <avm19>`.

- |Enhancement| A new parameter `force_alpha` was added to
  :class:`naive_bayes.BernoulliNB`, :class:`naive_bayes.ComplementNB`,
  :class:`naive_bayes.CategoricalNB`, and :class:`naive_bayes.MultinomialNB`,
  allowing user to set parameter alpha to a very small number, greater or equal
  0, which was earlier automatically changed to `1e-10` instead.
  :pr:`16747` by :user:`arka204`,
  :pr:`18805` by :user:`hongshaoyang`,
  :pr:`22269` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.neighbors`
........................

- |Enhancement| :class:`neighbors.KernelDensity` bandwidth parameter now accepts
  definition using Scott's and Silverman's estimation methods.
  :pr:`10468` by :user:`Ruben <icfly2>` and :pr:`22993` by
  :user:`Jovan Stojanovic <jovan-stojanovic>`.

- |Feature| Adds new function :func:`neighbors.sort_graph_by_row_values` to
  sort a CSR sparse graph such that each row is stored with increasing values.
  This is useful to improve efficiency when using precomputed sparse distance
  matrices in a variety of estimators and avoid an `EfficiencyWarning`.
  :pr:`23139` by `Tom Dupre la Tour`_.

- |Fix| :class:`NearestCentroid` now raises an informative error message at fit-time
  instead of failing with a low-level error message at predict-time.
  :pr:`23874` by :user:`Juan Gomez <2357juan>`.

- |Fix| Set `n_jobs=None` by default (instead of `1`) for
  :class:`neighbors.KNeighborsTransformer` and
  :class:`neighbors.RadiusNeighborsTransformer`.
  :pr:`24075` by :user:`Valentin Laurent <Valentin-Laurent>`.

:mod:`sklearn.preprocessing`
............................

- |Enhancement| :class:`preprocessing.FunctionTransformer` will always try to set
  `n_features_in_` and `feature_names_in_` regardless of the `validate` parameter.
  :pr:`23993` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.svm`
..................

- |API| The `class_weight_` attribute is now deprecated for
  :class:`svm.NuSVR`, :class:`svm.SVR`, :class:`svm.OneClassSVM`.
  :pr:`22898` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`.

:mod:`sklearn.tree`
...................

- |Enhancement| :func:`tree.plot_tree`, :func:`tree.export_graphviz` now uses
  a lower case `x[i]` to represent feature `i`. :pr:`23480` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.utils`
....................

- |Enhancement| :func:`utils.extmath.randomized_svd` now accepts an argument,
  `lapack_svd_driver`, to specify the lapack driver used in the internal
  deterministic SVD used by the randomized SVD algorithm.
  :pr:`20617` by :user:`Srinath Kailasa <skailasa>`

Code and Documentation Contributors
-----------------------------------

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the maintenance and improvement of
the project since version 1.1, including:

TODO: update at the time of the release.
